Let me never fall into the vulgar mistake of dreaming that I am persecuted
whenever I am contradicted. ::: Ralph Waldo Emerson

I don't wait for moods. You accomplish nothing if you do that. Your mind must
know it has got to get down to work. ::: Pearl S. Buck

Scientists become method oriented rather than problem oriented. Stop doing
experiments for a while and think. ::: Platt (1964), quoted in Pigliucci
(2002:92)

Even the most practical man of affairs is usually in the thrall of the ideas of
some long-dead economist. ::: John Maynard Keynes

Academics fight over resources much more readily than over principles. :::
https://twitter.com/molpopgen/status/512340805923508224

Must we geneticists become bacteriologists, physiological chemists and
physicists, simultaneously with being zoologists and botanists? Let us hope so.
:::  H.J. Muller (1922)

The ground rule—or perhaps doctrine would be a better term—is that adaptation
is a special and onerous concept that should be used only where it is really
necessary. ::: G.C. Williams

A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds. ::: Emerson

The History of Science has suffered greatly from the use by teachers of
second-hand material, and the consequent obliteration of the circumstances and
the intellectual atmosphere in which the great discoveries of the past were
made. A first-hand study is always instructive, and often ... full of
surprises. ::: R.A. Fisher, 1955

The natural phenomena of the evolutionary history of man claim an entirely
peculiar place in the wide range of the scientific study of nature. There is
surely no subject of scientific investigation touching man more closely, or in
the knowledge of which he is more deeply concerned, than the human organism
itself; and of all the various branches of the science of man, or anthropology,
the history of his natural evolution should excite his highest interest. :::
Ernst Haeckel (1834–1919), The Evolution of Man (1892), p. 2

The grand aim of all science is to cover the greatest number of empirical facts
by logical deduction from the smallest number of hypotheses or axioms. :::
Albert Einstein

If your idea of happiness has to do with someone else changing what they say,
what they do, you are in for a fucking hard ass road. ::: RuPaul

The tendency of modern scientific teaching is to neglect the great books, to lay
far too much stress upon relatively unimportant modern work, and to present
masses of detail of doubtful truth and questionable weight in such a way as to
obscure principles. ::: R.A. Fisher

Mathematics is not a careful march down a well-cleared highway, but a journey
into a strange wilderness, where the explorers often get lost. Rigour should be
a signal to the historian that the maps have been made, and the real explorers
have gone elsewhere. ::: William S. Anglin

The whole problem with the world is that fools and fanatics are always so certain
of themselves, and wiser people so full of doubts. ::: Bertrand Russell

He who asks is a fool for five minutes, but he who does not ask remains a fool
forever. ::: Chinese Proverb

Never argue with a fool, onlookers may not be able to tell the difference. :::
Mark Twain

The greatest challenge to any thinker is stating the problem in a way that will
allow a solution. ::: Bertrand Russell

As a mathematical discipline travels far from its empirical source, or still
more, if it is a second and third generation only indirectly inspired from
ideas coming from 'reality', it is beset with very grave dangers. It becomes
more and more purely aestheticizing, more and more purely l'art pour l'art.
This need not be bad, if the field is surrounded by correlated subjects, which
still have closer empirical connections, or if the discipline is under the
influence of men with an exceptionally well-developed taste. But there is a
grave danger that the subject will develop along the line of least resistance,
that the stream, so far from its source, will separate into a multitude of
insignificant branches, and that the discipline will become a disorganized mass
of details and complexities. In other words, at a great distance from its
empirical source, or after much 'abstract' inbreeding, a mathematical subject
is in danger of degeneration. At the inception the style is usually classical;
when it shows signs of becoming baroque the danger signal is up. It would be
easy to give examples, to trace specific evolutions into the baroque and the
very high baroque, but this would be too technical. In any event, whenever this
stage is reached, the only remedy seems to me to be the rejuvenating return to
the source: the reinjection of more or less directly empirical ideas. I am
convinced that this is a necessary condition to conserve the freshness and the
vitality of the subject, and that this will remain so in the future. ::: John
von Neumann

An ounce of algebra is worth a ton of verbal argument. ::: J.B.S Haldane

The business of the statistician is to catalyze the scientific learning
process. ::: George E. P. Box

To do science is to search for repeated patterns, not simply to accumulate the
facts. :::  Robert MacArthur, 1972

You go to war with the data you have, not the data you wish you had. :::
Richard McElreath

Just about five-eighths (of a century) ago there was a sharp discontinuity:
algebra began to appear on the pages of the statistician's, journals. The
pioneering work of Karl Pearson spread out in many directions; that of Student
spread out in many others, including the analysis of economic time series.
Since that time the tools of the statistician have been sharpened on the
grindstone of algebra and hammered out on the anvil of mathematical models. We
learned rapidly that, to a far greater extent than we had dared to think, one
could use data to deal both with the uncertainties of nature and with the
uncertainties of data-based results. ::: John Tukey

Far better an approximate answer to the right question, which is often vague,
than an exact answer to the wrong question, which can always be made precise.
::: John Tukey, 1962

I know of scarcely anything so apt to impress the imagination as the wonderful
form of cosmic order expressed by the law of frequency of error [the Gaussian
distribution]. The law would have been personified by the Greeks if they had
known of it. It reigns with serenity and complete self-effacement amidst the
wildest confusion.  The larger the mob, the greater the apparent anarchy, the
more perfect is its sway. It is the supreme law of unreason. ::: Sir Francis
Galton, 1889

I never dreamed that islands, about fifty or sixty miles apart, and most of
them in sight of each other, formed of precisely the same rocks, placed under a
quite similar climate, rising to a nearly equal height, would have been
differently tenanted. ::: Charles Darwin

Regularization saves your bacon. ::: Richard McElreath

I believe that, in the end, it is *applications* which justify mathematics. The
'artistic' justification of pure mathematics in terms of intrinsic qualities
like elegance and generality rings rather hollow in my ears when I compare the
best mathematics with the greatest music. ::: L. C. G. Rogers and Davis Williams
in *Diffusions, Markov Processes, and Martingales*.

But I am very poorly today and very stupid and hate everybody and everything.
::: Charles Darwin

If you want to do something really new, go back to points in the past where
there was a neat idea that never really caught on, and follow the path of that
idea to see where it leads. ::: approximate quote from Marvin Minksy, from
http://aurellem.org/thoughts/html/sussman-reading-list.html

It is difficult to imagine that the blind play of genes could produce man. :::
G.C. Williams.

Those who read own the world, and those who watch television lose it. ::: Werner
Herzog

Hence, as more individuals are produced than can possibly survive, there must
in every case be a struggle for existence, either one individual with another
of the same species, or with the individuals of distinct species, or with the
physical conditions of life. It is the doctrine of Malthus applied with
manifold force to the whole animal and vegetable kingdoms; for in this case
there can be no artificial increase of food, and no prudential restraint from
marriage. Although some species may be now increasing, more or less rapidly, in
numbers, all cannot do so, for the world would not hold them. ::: Charles Darwin (The Origin)


Science is what we understand well enough to explain to a computer. Art is
everything else we do. ::: Donald E. Knuth (in the forward of A = B)

Inventive genius requires pleasurable mental activity as a condition for its
vigorous exercise. 'Necessity is the mother of invention' is a silly proverb.
'Necessity is the mother of futile dodges' is much nearer to the truth. The
basis of the growth of modern invention is science, and science is almost
wholly the outgrowth of pleasurable intellectual curiosity. - A. N. Whitehead
(quote in Concrete Mathematics)

We may say that, before Maxwell, Physical Reality, in so far as it was to
represent the process of nature, was thought of as consisting in material
particles, whose variations consist only in movements governed by partial
differential equations. Since Maxwell's time, Physical Reality has been thought
of as represented by continuous fields, governed by partial differential
equations, and not capable of any mechanical interpretation. This change in the
conception of Reality is the most profound and the most fruitful that physics
has experienced since the time of Newton. ::: Einstein

Thought is only a flash between two long nights, but this flash is everything.
::: Henri Poincare

Species are merely those strongly marked races or local forms which, when in
contact, do not intermix, and when inhabiting distinct areas are generally
regarded to have had a separate origin, and to be incapable of producing a
fertile hybrid offspring.  But as the test of hybridity cannot be applied in
one case in ten thousand, and even if it could be applied, would prove nothing,
since it is founded on an assumption of the very question to be decided - and
as the test of origin is in every case inapplicable - and as, further, the test
of non-intermixture is useless, except in those rare cases where the most
closely allied species are found inhabiting the same area, it will be evident
that we have no means whatever of distinguishing so-called "true species" from
the several modes of variation here pointed out, and into which they so often
pass by an insensible gradation. :::  A.R. Wallace (1865; "On the phenomena of
variation and geographical distribution as illustrated by the Papilionidae of
the Malayan region", p. 12)

There is a strong and widely held belief that all organisms are perfect and
that everything within them is there for a function. Believers ascribe to the
Darwinian natural selection process a fastidious prescience that it cannot
possible have and some go so far as to think that patently useless features of
existing organisms are there as an investment for the future ...  Even today,
long after the discovery of repetitive sequences and introns, pointing out that
25% of our genome consists of millions of copies of one boring sequence, fails
to move audiences. They are all convinced by the argument that if this DNA were
totally useless, natural selection would already have removed it. Consequently,
it must have a function that still remains to be discovered. Some think that it
could even be there for evolution of the future—that is, to allow the creation
of new genes. As this was done in the past, they argue, why not in the future?
... Some years ago I noticed that there are two kinds of rubbish in the world
and that most languages have different words to distinguish them. There is the
rubbish we keep, which is junk, and the rubbish we throw away, which is
garbage. The excess DNA in our genomes is junk, and it is there because it is
harmless, as well as being useless, and because the molecular processes
generating extra DNA outpace those getting rid of it. Were the extra DNA to
become disadvantageous, it would become subject to selection, just as junk that
takes up too much space, or is beginning to smell, is instantly converted to
garbage. ::: Sydney Brenner

Using R is a bit akin to smoking. The beginning is difficult, one may get
headaches and even gag the first few times. But in the long run, it becomes
pleasurable and even addictive. Yet, deep down, for those willing to be honest,
there is something not fully healthy in it. ::: Francois Pinard

A genuine understanding of the key concepts and principles of the probability
theory is essential for any work in stochastic processes. These concepts are
simple, but treacherously so. There is probably no branch of mathematics in
which it is so easy to advance plausible sounding arguments that are in fact
wrong! ::: Cox & Davison, 1994, p. 25

Maybe it’s because I was raised as a Protestant and became an environmentalist,
but I’ve long been struck by the spiritual kinship of environmentalism and New
England Puritanism. Both belief systems are haunted by the feeling that simply
to be human is to be guilty. In the case of environmentalism, the feeling is
grounded in scientific fact. ::: Jonathan Franzen,
http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/04/06/carbon-capture

What is found in biology is mechanisms, mechanisms built with chemical
components and that are often modified by other, later, mechanisms added to the
earlier ones. While Occam's razor is a useful tool in the physical sciences, it
can be a very dangerous implement in biology. It is thus very rash to use
simplicity and elegance as a guide in biological research. While DNA could be
claimed to be both simple and elegant, it must be remembered that DNA almost
certainly originated fairly close to the origin of life when things were
necessarily simple or they would not have got going.  Biologists must
constantly keep in mind that what they see was not designed, but rather
evolved. It might be thought, therefore, that evolutionary arguments would play
a large part in guiding biological research, but this is far from the case. It
is difficult enough to study what is happening now. To figure out exactly what
happened in evolution is even more difficult. Thus evolutionary achievements
can be used as hints to suggest possible lines of research, but it is highly
dangerous to trust them too much. It is all too easy to make mistaken
inferences unless the process involved is already very well understood. ::: Francis Crick

Ronald Fisher in England was an advocate of eugenics, and both he and Sewall
Wright in America formulated the principle of natural selection as a process of
increasing, from generation to generation, the average fitness of members of a
breeding population. Yet these formulations make no predictions about a general
progress of species. This may seem odd, since the process of natural selection
is supposed to make organisms more fit for their environment. So why does
evolution not result in a general increase of the fitness of life to the
external world? Wouldn’t that be progress? The reason that there is no general
progress is that the environments in which particular species live are
themselves changing and, relative to the organisms, are usually getting worse.
So most of natural selection is concerned with keeping up. Certainly quite new
kinds of making a living have been occasionally exploited in evolution, but
every species eventually becomes extinct (99.9 percent already have) and no way
of making a living will be around forever.4 Judging from the fossil record a
typical mammalian species lasts roughly ten million years, so we might expect
to last another nine million unless, as a consequence of our immense ability to
manipulate the physical world, we either extinguish ourselves a good deal
sooner or invent some extraordinary way to significantly postpone the
inevitable. ::: Richard Lewontin, http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2005/10/20/the-wars-over-evolution/

"Great" scientists are those who, like Newton, make laws that apply
universally, while lesser ones spend their lives dissecting particular
phenomena. ::: Richard Lewontin 

That a theoretical formulation is desirable because it makes it easier and more
efficient to write more articles and books giving simple explanations for
phenomena that are complex and diverse seems a strange justification for work
that claims to be scientific. It confuses "understanding" in the weak sense of
making coherent and comprehensible statements about the real world with
“understanding” that means making correct statements about nature. It makes the
investigation of material nature into an intellectual game, disarming us in our
struggle to maintain science against mysticism. ::: Richard Lewontin

It is, I think, particularly in times of acknowledged crisis that scientists
have turned to philosophical analysis as a device for unlocking the riddles of
their field. ::: Kuhn, 1970, p. 88

If you’re thinking without writing, you only think you’re thinking. ::: Leslie
Lamport

In a sexual population, each genotype is unique, never to recur. The life
expectancy of a genotype is a single generation. In contrast, the population of
genes endures. ::: James F. Crow

"It is an old maxim of mine," said Holmes, "that when you have excluded the
impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth."
"Perhaps," said Watson, skeptically, "You may have convinced me as to the
motive, but you are yet to explain how it is done." ::: Sherlock Holmes, The
Sign of Four

If the central dogma is true, and if it is also true that nucleic acids are the
only means whereby information is transmitted between generations, this has
crucial implications for evolution. It would imply that all evolutionary
novelty requires changes in nucleic acids, and that these changes – mutations –
are essentially accidental and non-adaptive in nature. Changes elsewhere – in
the egg cytoplasm, in materials transmitted through the placenta, in the
mother's milk – might alter the development of the child, but, unless the
changes were in nucleic acids, they would have no long-term evolutionary
effects. ::: Maynard Smith

Molecular clocks are like Santa Claus: everyone wants to believe in them, but
no one really does. ::: Sanderson (2015), H. Brad Shaffer, pers. comm.

It is generally accepted that the behaviour characteristic of a species is
just as much the product of evolution as the morphology. ::: W.D. Hamilton

Under the circumstances that a genus is either now or has recently been in a
mutable state it would seem likely that natural selection would not yet have
had time to weed out all the forms doomed to perish through lack of adaptation
or insufficient vigor. ::: Leonas L. Burlingame, 1921

No one ought to feel surprise at much remaining as yet unexplained in regard to
the origin of species and varieties, if he make due allowance for our profound
ignorance in regard to the mutual relations of the many beings which live
around us. ::: Darwin (1859, p. 6)

The scientist explains the world by successive approximations. ::: Hubble

Variation is the hard reality . . . Means and medians are the abstractions. :::
Stephen Jay Gould

I would like to mention rather anecdotally that in the last three or four years
the fog of quantitative variation, which I had assumed to be the result of
segregation at a large number of loci, has gradually begun to clear as I have
recognized individual segregations almost as personal friends. ::: Alan
Robertson in "The Nature of Quantitative Genetic Variation"

No aphorism is more frequently repeated in connection with field trials, than
that we must ask Nature few questions, or, ideally, one question, at a time.
The writer is convinced that this view is wholly mistaken. Nature, he suggests,
will best respond to a logical and carefully thought out questionnaire ;
indeed, if we ask her a single question, she will often refuse to answer until
some other topic has been discussed. ::: R.A. Fisher in "The Arrangement of
Field Experiments"

I have had the growing suspicion that in revealing the great variety of genic
forms segregating in populations we have given the right answer to the wrong
question. That is, the question was never really, How much genetic variation is
there…? but rather, What is the nature of genetic variation for fitness in a
population? ::: RC Lewontin, 1974; p. x


For my team, I'll take the younger Darwin of the first edition, when the swing
of his selectionist bat was true. ::: David Queller, "The Spaniels of St. Marx
and the Panglossian Paradox: A Critique of a Rhetorical Programme", 1995

As Samuel Butler so truly said: 'To me it seems that the "Origin of Variation",
whatever it is, is the only true "Origin of Species".' :: W. Bateson, 1909 (in
R.A. Fisher, 1930)

Man in many respects may be compared with those animals which have long been
domesticated. ::: Charles Darwin, 1871

It is suggested that this loss of fitness is the price paid by a species for
its capacity for further evolution. ::: Haldane, 1937, p. 349

Yes, Dan [Hartl], [you can join my lab] provided you understand that population
genetics is a recondite field that will never be of great interest except to a
small group of specialists. ::: James Crow to Dan Hartl,
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/11/science/james-f-crow-population-genetics-pioneer-dies-at-95.html

Speaking of truly brilliant people fucking up, let's start with Galton. :::
Michael Turelli

Any misfortune 'that lies outside the sphere of choice' should be considered an
opportunity to strengthen our resolve, not an excuse to weaken it. :::
https://aeon.co/essays/why-stoicism-is-one-of-the-best-mind-hacks-ever-devised

This procedure is based on the principle of ergodicity, which says that
averaging a random variable of a stationary stochastic process over time
leads to the same result as averaging this quantity at any given time point
over different realizations of the process. ::: Kim and Stephan, 2000; nice
definition of ergodicity.


A scientific man ought to have no wishes, no affections, - a mere heart of stone. ::: Charles Darwin

The most dangerous worldview is the worldview of those who have not viewed the
world. ::: Alexander von Humboldt

The time in which men believed that science could be advanced by the mere
collection of facts has long passed away: we know that it is not necessary to
accumulate a vast number of miscellaneous facts, or to make as it were a
catalogue of them; but we know that it is necessary to establish facts which,
when grouped together in the light of a theory, will enable us to acquire a
certain degree of insight into some natural phenomenon. ::: Weismann, 1889

No! Biology is not obliged to wait until Physics and Chemistry are completely
finished; nor have we to wait for the investigation of the phenomena of
heredity until the physiology of the cell is complete. Instead of comparing the
progress of science to a building, I should prefer to compare it to a mining
operation, undertaken in order to open up a freely branching lode. Such a lode
must not be attacked from one point alone, but from many points simultaneously.
From some of these we should quickly reach the deep‐seated parts of the lode,
from others we should only reach its superficial parts; but from every point
some knowledge of the complex tout ensemtle of the lode would be gained. And
the more numerous the points of attack, the more complete would be the
knowledge acquired, for valuable insight will be obtained in every place where
the work is carried on with discretion and perseverance.  ::: Weismann, 1889

To go on investigating without the guidance of theories, is like attempting to
walk in a thick mist without a track and without a compass.  ::: Weismann, 1889

Why is thought being a secretion of brain, more wonderful than gravity a
property of matter? It is our arrogance, our admiration of ourselves. :::
Charles Darwin, in this transmutation notebook.
